# PyPI2PKGBUILD

Convert PyPI packages to Arch Linux packages, inspired from
[pip2arch](https://github.com/bluepeppers/pip2arch).

<!-- vim-markdown-toc GFM -->
* [Dependencies and installation](#dependencies-and-installation)
* [Usage](#usage)
    * [Usage notes](#usage-notes)
* [Build-time dependencies of packages](#build-time-dependencies-of-packages)
* [Vendored packages](#vendored-packages)
* [Comparison with other tools](#comparison-with-other-tools)
    * [Comparison with pip2arch](#comparison-with-pip2arch)
    * [Comparison with fpm](#comparison-with-fpm)

<!-- vim-markdown-toc -->

## Dependencies and installation

`pypi2pkgbuild.py` depends on the Arch Linux packages
[`namcap`](https://wiki.archlinux.org/index.php/Namcap),
[`pkgfile`](https://wiki.archlinux.org/index.php/Pkgfile) and
[`python-pip`](https://wiki.archlinux.org/index.php/Python#Package_management).

The script can be installed with `pip install [--user] .`, or can also be run
directly.

One can even run `pypi2pkgbuild.py` on itself to create a proper Arch package
(`pypi2pkgbuild.py git+https://github.com/anntzer/pypi2pkgbuild`).

A minimal test suite (checking that `pypi2pkgbuild.py` can indeed package
itself) can by run with `pytest` (`pytest -s` to keep the output to the
terminal).

## Usage

`pypi2pkgbuild.py PYPINAME` creates a PKGBUILD for the latest version of the
given PyPI package (including prereleases if the `--pre` flag is passed.
Because PyPI's dependencies are somewhat unreliable, it installs the package in
a virtualenv to figure out the dependencies.  Note that thanks to `pip`'s wheel
cache, the build is later reused; i.e. the procedure entails no extra work.

A `-git` package can be built with `pypi2pkbguild.py git+https://...`.

The package is then built and verified with `namcap`.

The goal is to make this tool as automated as possible: if all the information
to build a package is (reasonably) accessible, this tool should be able to
build it.

In order to provide additional information to `makepkg`, edit
`PKGBUILD_EXTRAS`, which is sourced at the *end* of `PKGBUILD`.

### Usage notes

- It is suggested to create an alias with standard options set, e.g.
```sh
    alias pypi2pkgbuild.py='PKGEXT=.pkg.tar pypi2pkgbuild.py -g cython -b /tmp/pypi2pkgbuild/ -f'
```

- By default, the `pkgrel` of (standard) packages is set to `00`.  This allows
automatic upgrading into official packages (and AUR ones, if an AUR helper is
used) whenever the repositories are updated.  Additionally, the use of `00`
rather than `0` serves as a (weak) marker that the package was automatically
generated by this tool.  In order to prevent such an upgrade, one can use the
`--pkgrel` flag to set `pkgrel` to, e.g., `99`.

- If one wishes to completely bypass AUR Python packages while maintaining the
use of an AUR helper for non-Python packages, one can define a shell function
that excludes `pypi2pkgbuild.py`-generated packages that do not appear in the
official repositories, e.g., for `pacaur`:
```sh
pacaur() {
    if [[ "$1" = "-Syu" ]]; then
        # First update, in case some packages moved in or out of the official
        # repos.
        sudo pacman -Sy
        PKGEXT=.pkg.tar command pacaur -Su --ignore \
            "$(pacman -Qm | grep '^python-.*-\(00\|99\)$' | cut -d' ' -f1 | paste -sd, )"
    else
        command pacaur "$@"
    fi
}
```
This function will not bypass Python packages explicitly installed from
the AUR, as the user may have done so to bypass some incorrect packaging
by `pypi2pkgbuild.py`.  It is recommended to use the `-i` flag to calls to
`pypi2pkgbuild.py` (e.g. in an alias) to exclude packages that are mishandled
by `pypi2pkgbuild.py` (see [TODO.md](TODO.md#mispackaged-packages)).

- In order to package a locally available git repository, use
```sh
$ pypi2pkgbuild.py git+file://$absolute_path_to_repo  # (e.g. file:///home/...)
```
In order to package a locally available sdist or wheel, use
```sh
$ pypi2pkgbuild.py file://$absolute_path_to_file  # (e.g. file:///home/...)
```
Note that in both cases *absolute* paths are necessary.

Building packages from local repos or wheels needs to be done in topological
order of the dependencies (so that `pypi2pkgbuild.py` can find that the
dependencies are actually present), or by passing the `-d` flag ("do not
build dependencies"); if it is used, the Arch package may not use the correct
dependency names (if they are not of the form `python-pep503-normalized-name`).

- By default, `pypi2pkgbuild.py` ignores `pip` config files such as
`~/.config/pip/pip.conf`.  An explicitly set `PIP_CONFIG_FILE` will be
respected, but may cause `pypi2pkgbuild.py` to fail as some `pip` calls will be
unexpectedly modified.

Likewise, user-site packages are ignored unless `PYTHONNOUSERSITE` is
explicitly set to an empty value.

## Build-time dependencies of packages

`pypi2pkgbuild.py` attempts to guess whether `Cython` and `SWIG` are build-time
dependencies by checking for the presence of `.pyx` and `.i` files,
respectively.  If this is not desired, set the `--guess-makedepends` option
accordingly.

`pypi2pkgbuild.py` guesses whether `numpy` is a build-time dependency by
attempting a build without `numpy`, then, in case of failure, a build with
`numpy`.

Additional Python build-time dependencies (i.e., `setup_requires`) can be
specified (as PyPI names) using the `--setup-requires` flag.

## Vendored packages

Some Arch packages (e.g. `ipython`) include a number of smaller PyPI packages.

Because it is not possible to assign a meaningful version automatically,
`pypi2pkgbuild.py` instead creates an independent Arch package for each of the
PyPI packages (with two dashes in the name, to prevent name conflicts) and a
master package that depends on all of them.  The `pkgrel` of the master package
is set to `$official_pkgrel.99`, so that the package appears more recent than
the current official version but older than any future official version.  All
these packages `conflict` with all versions of the official package (except the
newly created package), so updating should work fine when the official package
is actually updated.

However, dependencies are still expressed using the master package (to avoid
breakage on update into an official package), so internal dependencies will
appear be circular.

All the packages are placed in a subfolder named `meta:$pkgname`, so one can
easily install everything by `cd`'ing there and running
```sh
    $ sudo pacman -U --asdeps **/*.xz
    $ sudo pacman -D --asexplicit $pkgname/$pkgname.tar.xz
```

## Comparison with other tools

### Comparison with pip2arch

`pypi2pkgbuild.py` includes many improvements over `pip2arch`:
- Supports wheels (the default is to prefer `any`-platform wheels, then
  `sdist`s, then `manylinux1` wheels, but this can be changed using
  `--pkgtypes`).
- Resolves Python dependencies via installation in a temporary virtualenv, and
  also creates PKGBUILDs for those that are not available as official packages.
- Resolves binary dependencies via `namcap` and adds them to the `depends`
  array if they are installed (thus, it is suggested to first install
  them as `--asdeps` and then let the generated PKGBUILD pick them up as
  dependencies).  Note that some packages are distributed with a copy of the
  required libraries; in this case, `pypi2pkgbuild.py`’s behavior will depend
  on whether the package defaults to using the system-wide library or its own
  copy.
- Automatically tries to fetch a missing license file from Github, if
  applicable.
- Automatically builds the package (with options given in `--makepkg=...`) and
  run `namcap`.
- Automatically builds all outdated dependencies via `-u`.

### Comparison with fpm

Another tool for converting PyPI packages to Arch Linux packages is the generic
converter [fpm](https://github.com/jordansissel/fpm); however, it seems to be
incompatible with recent `pip`s.
